---
title: "Advent of Code 2023: Day 11"
date: 2023-12-11T17:08:11+01:00
author: Martin Kauppinen
series: ["Advent of Code 2023", "Advent of Code"]
---
[Code for solutions available on GitHub.](https://github.com/martinkauppinen/aoc-2023/)

Still covid. Was slightly better a few hours ago, but getting worse from sitting
at the computer. I probably shouldn't be doing these puzzles. Or writing these
posts.

## Cosmic Expansion
Thankfully, today was really simple. The input is a grid where some coordinates
are marked. The twist is, every row and every column in the grid that does not
have a mark, should actually be doubled. We then need to get the sum of the
pairwise [Manhattan distances](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Taxicab_geometry)
of each possible pair of marked coordinates.

The first part of the solution is easy -- iterate through all rows and columns
of the grid, and save the marked coordinates in a vector, keeping track of which
row and column indices contain no marks as you go.

Then, go through the list of coordinates, and add to their row index the number
of empty rows above them. Then add to their column index the number of empty
rows to the left of them. Once you have done this to all the galaxies (the
marked coordinates are galaxies in the lore), the solution is straightforward with the help of [`Itertools::tuple_combinations`](https://docs.rs/itertools/latest/itertools/trait.Itertools.html#method.tuple_combinations):
```rust
galaxies
    .iter()
    .tuple_combinations()
    .fold(0, |acc, (a, b)| acc + a.manhattan_distance(b))
```

### Part 2
For part 2, it turns out that each empty row or column shouldn't be replaced
with 2 empty rows or columns, but a million. The solution from part 1 is simply
adapted by instead of adding the number of empties to each coordinate index, add
the number of empties times 999999 (one less than a million, such that the final
number of copies is one million). The solution is then exactly the same once you
have the `Vec` of galaxies with adjusted coordinates.
