---
title: "Advent of Code 2023: Day 08"
date: 2023-12-11T16:15:42+01:00
author: Martin Kauppinen
series: ["Advent of Code 2023", "Advent of Code"]
---

[Code for solutions available on GitHub.](https://github.com/martinkauppinen/aoc-2023/)

The next couple of posts are delayed and will be shorter because I have managed
to catch covid, and am not in the best state to be solving puzzles or writing
many words. However, I will still summarize the solutions here, albeit with less
detail both word-wise and code-wise.

## Haunted Wasteland
Today's input consists of a list of a network of nodes, and their connections.
Each node has a left connection and a right connection. The given example input
looks like this:
```
RL

AAA = (BBB, CCC)
BBB = (DDD, EEE)
CCC = (ZZZ, GGG)
DDD = (DDD, DDD)
EEE = (EEE, EEE)
GGG = (GGG, GGG)
ZZZ = (ZZZ, ZZZ)
```

The first line is a sequence of steps to follow. The sequence repeats once it
gets to the end, so we're supposed to loop through these steps. Part 1 asks for
the number of steps required to end up at node `ZZZ`, starting at node `AAA`.

A network of nodes seems like a graph theory problem, and usually an adjacency
matrix is useful. However, in this case the graph is pretty sparse, each node
only having two outgoing edges, so I opted for an [adjacency
list](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Adjacency_list) instead.

Each node is labelled with three letters, which can be interpreted as 3-digit
base-26 numbers. A represents 0 and Z represents 26. So the adjacency list can
be modelled by an array with 26^3 elements. Each element is then a pair of
indices, left and right, pointing to the nodes connected to the node at that
index.
```rust
type AdjacencyList = [[Option<usize>; 2]; 26 * 26 * 26];
```

The elements are arrays of length 2, which means `L` and `R` can be translated
to `0` and `1` and used to index the elements. The elements contain
`Option<usize>`s because not all 3-digit base-26 numbers are present in the
input. Only around 750 in my case. This type takes up 8 * 2 * 26 * 26 * 26 bytes
of memory, roughly 275 KiB [^size-estimate]. Contrast this with an adjacency
matrix, with some 1-byte enum representing left, right, and no connection. That
would require (26 * 26 * 26)^2 bytes of memory, or roughly 300 MiB.

[^size-estimate]: I'm assuming that an `Option<usize>` takes up 8 bytes, the
same as a `usize`. This is probably not strictly true, but it's good enough for
me. I could have used a sentinel value like `usize::MAX` for `None` instead to
achieve the same result.

Anyway, once parsed into this type, and a cyclic iterator over the directions is
created with
[`Iterator::cycle`](https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/iter/trait.Iterator.html#method.cycle),
the problem is easily solved by starting at index 0, and following the
directions to the next index until landing at index 26^3 (aka `ZZZ`, aka
`AdjacencyList::len() - 1`).

### Part 2
For part 2, it turns out that every node that ends with `A` (aka is a multiple
of 26), there is a corresponding node that ends with `Z` (aka is one less than a
multiple of 26). Starting at all nodes ending with `A` (multiples of 26), and
following the directions for all of them simultaneously, how many steps until
all paths have ended up at their corresponding node _at the same time_?

I fell into the rabbit hole pretty deep here. Trying to figure out questions like
- What if a path passes through multiple nodes ending with `Z`?
- What if two paths end up at the same node ending with `Z`?
- The paths must be cyclic for the problem to be solvable, how long does each
path have to step until it falls into a cycle?

I investigated these questions and wrote some terrible code to try to account
for it, which turned out to be unnecessary. All nodes ending with `A` are
already in their loop from the start, and they do not pass through multiple
nodes ending with `Z`. The solution is simply to find all the path lengths and
-- because the paths are all cyclic -- compute their least common multiple.
