---
title: "Advent of Code 2023: Day 01"
date: 2023-12-06T19:53:18+01:00
author: Martin Kauppinen
series: ["Advent of Code 2023"]
---

[Code for solutions available on GitHub.](https://github.com/martinkauppinen/aoc-2023/)

I figured I would chronicle my solving of Advent of Code 2023. At least as far
as I have time to solve it, and the energy to post about it. Posts may not
appear on the day of the puzzle, and all puzzles may not be solved, but I'll do
my best. The puzzles can be found on the [Advent of Code
website](https://adventofcode.com/2023). My solutions will be available on
[GitHub](https://github.com/martinkauppinen/aoc-2023) even if I don't blog about
them. My solutions will be in Rust, of course ;)

I am using an [Advent of Code template
repository](https://github.com/fspoettel/advent-of-code-rust), which takes care
of downloading puzzle inputs, scaffolding solutions, reading the files,
benchmarking, and submitting solutions. I'm really liking it so far. The input
is given as a `&str` to functions named `part_one` and `part_two`, which return
an `Option<T: Display>`.

Enough with the preamble. Let's get to solving!

## Trebuchet?!
The problem statement for day 1 is very simple. Given some lines of text, find
the first and last digit in each line, create a two-digit number from them, and
add them all together.

The example given is
```
1abc2
pqr3stu8vwx
a1b2c3d4e5f
treb7uchet
```
It's pretty clear that the list of numbers from this text will be 12, 38, 15,
and 77. The last line only has one digit, which is both the first and last
digit. The sum of these is 12 + 38 + 15 + 77 = 144.

Using
[`str::lines`](https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/primitive.str.html#method.lines)
will be used heavily throughout the event to iterate through the lines of the
input. Each line can then be mapped from a `&str` to a byte slice (`&[u8]`) with
[`str::as_bytes`](https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/primitive.str.html#method.as_bytes).
```rust
input
    .lines()
    .map(str::as_bytes)
```
For each byte slice, the first and last digits can be found by iterating over
the byte slice first from the front, then from the back, matching for ASCII
digits. A funny thing with ASCII digits is that they start at 0x30 and go up to
0x39. The decimal value is in the lower
[nybble](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nybble). This means converting from an
ASCII byte to the digit is easily done by bit-anding with the inverse of '0'.
This is a kind of silly way to do it when you could just use a proper parsing
procedure[^alliteration], but it works well.
[^alliteration]: I like alliteration.

```rust
input
    .lines()
    .map(str::as_bytes)
    .map(|line| {
        let a = line
            .iter()
            .find(|b| b.is_ascii_digit())
            .unwrap() & !b'0';
        let b = line
            .iter()
            .rfind(|b| b.is_ascii_digit())
            .unwrap() & !b'0';
        10 * a + b
    })
```
Finally, slapping a `.sum()` on the end will give the right answer. Iterators
are great.


### Part 2
As always, the second part adds a twist to the problem. Some of the digits in
each line of the input are actually spelled out as words. The example given is
```
two1nine
eightwothree
abcone2threexyz
xtwone3four
4nineeightseven2
zoneight234
7pqrstsixteen
```

#### First solution - regex
Yeah, yeah, I know.
> Some people, when confronted with a problem, think
> “I know, I'll use regular expressions.”   Now they have two problems. 
> - [Jamie Zawinski](http://regex.info/blog/2006-09-15/247)

So my first instinct was to simply use the [`regex` crate](https://crates.io/crates/regex)
to match the input with the strings `one`, `two`, `three`, etc as follows:
```rust
let re = regex::Regex::new(
    "one|two|three|four|five|six|seven|eight|nine|[0-9]"
);
```
This 
could have worked, but there is a slight complication. Some of the numbers _can
overlap_, and the `regex` crate does not support overlapping matches. For example, if a line consisted of
`abcdtwoneqwerty`, the correct number to construct would be `21`. But the crate
would only match `two` and be done, giving the incorrect number `22`. To continue solving this problem with regex, _lookahead_ is required, i.e. matching characters in the input without including them in the match. The `regex` crate doesn't support this, but the [`pcre2` crate](https://crates.io/crates/pcre2) does.

So using that crate instead, I crafted the following regex:
```
(on(?=e)|tw(?=o)|thre(?=e)|four|five|six|seve(?=n)|eigh(?=t)|nine|[0-9])
```
So iterating through the matches on the input, [together with a translation
function](https://github.com/martinkauppinen/aoc-2023/commit/982d2cdf3f4d06e88e8a5f2ba512b3f9f87fc2c6#diff-a0b7249b41e8d151bb973d8282e83c57423eca2f3524edfaf4664191bed72a8cR18-R31),
the first and last digit, whether spelled with numbers or letters, can be found.
The final number and summation is then very similar to the first solution.

```rust
input
    .lines()
    .map(|line| {
        let mut matches = re.find_iter(line.as_bytes());
        let a = matches.next().unwrap();
        let b = matches.next().unwrap();

        let a = digit_string_to_digit(a.unwrap().as_bytes());
        let b = digit_string_to_digit(a.unwrap().as_bytes());
        10 * a + b
    })
    .sum()
```

This worked fine, but something bugged me with it. Part 1 ran in about 40
microseconds on the input, while this solution to part 2 ran in 1.5
milliseconds. Still not super slow, but having a bigger unit bugged me, so I
wanted a better solution.

#### Second solution - transform and reuse part 1
Wouldn't it be great if we could just replace all spelled out numbers in the
string with the number they spell? Just replacing `one` with `1` and so on, then
reuse the solution for part 1? I thought so too. But the overlap problem will
rear its head again. Taking `twone` as an example again, depending on which
number is replaced first can be rendered as `tw1` or `2ne`. So the replacing has
to be done with more care, keeping the overlapping characters.

Instead of naïvely replacing `one` with `1`, replace it with `o1e`. Keeping the
first and last characters, which could overlap with `two` or `eight`
respectively, allows for further replacements. This could be done for all
digits, but I only did it for the ones that had overlaps with other digits. If
no overlap, I did the naïve substitution. All that said, here's the entire solution for part 2:


```rust
pub fn part_two(input: &str) -> Option<u32> {
    let input = input
        .replace("one", "o1e") // Keeping overlaps
        .replace("two", "t2o")
        .replace("three", "t3e")
        .replace("four", "4") // No overlap, can replace entire thing
        .replace("five", "5")
        .replace("six", "6")
        .replace("seven", "7n")
        .replace("eight", "e8t")
        .replace("nine", "n9");
    part_one(&input)
}
```
This runs in about 250 microseconds, which makes me happy :)