---
title: "Advent of Code 2024: Day 01"
date: 2024-12-01T09:40:33+01:00
author: Martin Kauppinen
series: ["Advent of Code 2024", "Advent of Code"]
---

Another year, another Advent of Code. Same deal as [last
year](/posts/aoc-2023-day-01). [Code
here](https://github.com/martinkauppinen/aoc-2024).
Diving straight into it.

## Historian Hysteria

The lore for this year is that we're looking for the Chief Historian. Today
we're checking his office but he's not there. What _is_ there, though, is a
bunch of notes about historically significant locations, each marked with an ID.
The other historians split into two groups and each gathered a list of all these
historical places and IDs. The two resulting lists of numbers are then held up
side by side.

```
3   4
4   3
2   5
1   3
3   9
3   3
```

This is the example input given. Part 1 theorizes that these two lists are
similar, but only off by a small amount. So we should compare them by finding
out the distance between the smallest IDs in each list, the second smallest,
etc. Then we can sum up all the distances and see just how different each list
is. I won't bother with documenting parsing the input. For the sake of this,
just assume that we have two sorted lists `a` and `b` of numbers (`Vec<u64>`
(yes, I'm doing this in Rust again)). Then this is the entire solution to part
1:

```rust
a.into_iter()
    .zip(b)
    .map(|(x, y)| x.abs_diff(y))
    .sum()
```

### Part 2

The difference between the lists is pretty large, so it seems like they are very
different. But a lot of numbers appear in both lists. This time we need to
calculate a similarity score between the two lists. The score is defined by for
every number in the left list, multiply its value by the number of times it
occurs in the right list, then sum up the result. A naïve solution would look
something like this:

```rust
a.into_iter().fold(0, |acc, x| {
    acc + b
        .iter()
        .skip_while(|y| x != **y)
        .take_while(|y| x != **y)
        .count() as u32
        * x as u32
})
```

And it works. Takes between 500-800 microseconds (including input parsing) on my
machine, depending on cache warmup and such. But it's doing a lot of unnecessary
work. Iterating through `b`, skipping elements, taking elements, etc. A key
insight is that if we could group each list into sub-lists only containing equal
elements, we can use the length of the sub-lists to multiply together with their
value if both are non-emtpy. That's a lot of words, so an example is in order.
Taking the example given above, imagine that `a` and `b` were instead this:

```rust
let a = [[1], [2], [3, 3, 3], [4]];
let b = [[3, 3, 3], [4], [5], [9]];
```

(This is not valid Rust, just an example).

Now, calculating the similarity for each of, for example, the number 3 is a
single operation. You multiply 3 by the length of its sub-list in `b`, and the
length of its sub-length in `a`, since that's how many times you would do it
naïvely in the first version of this solution. We can achieve exactly this with
the use of
[`Vec::chunk_by`](https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/vec/struct.Vec.html#method.chunk_by)!

```rust
let a = a.chunk_by(std::cmp::PartialEq::eq);
let b = a.chunk_by(std::cmp::PartialEq::eq);
```

Now `a` and `b` are iterators which returns sub-lists where all elements have
the same value. Since `a` and `b` were initially sorted, the sub-lists will
contain all such elements.

The rest of the code is a bit longer than the naïve solution, but it runs in
about 100 microseconds on my machine, a factor of 5-8 faster! And also roughly
the same speed as the solution to part 1!

```rust
let a = a.chunk_by(std::cmp::PartialEq::eq);
let mut b = a.chunk_by(std::cmp::PartialEq::eq).peekable();

let mut similarity: u64 = 0;
for chunk in a {
    let elem = chunk[0];

    while b.peek().is_some_and(|c| c[0] < elem) {
        b.next();
    }

    if b.peek().is_some_and(|c| c[0] == elem) {
        let other = b.next().unwrap();
        let n = other.len() as u64;
        let m = chunk.len() as u64;
        similarity += elem * n * m;
    }
}

```

`b` has to be a peekable iterator, so `.peekable()` is called on it. Then
each chunk in the left list (`a`) can be compared to chunks in the right list
(`b`). Since they are sorted, we skip all sub-lists whose values are less than
the current left sub-list we're looking at[^skip-while], and then check if the
next sub-list has the same elements as the current left sub-list[^if-let]. If
that is the case, we do the simple multiplication and add on to the similarity
score. Otherwise we just move on to the next sub-list and repeat.

[Full code listing for
today](https://github.com/martinkauppinen/aoc-2024/blob/main/src/bin/01.rs).

[^skip-while]: I wish there were a version of
    [`Iterator::skip_while`](https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/iter/trait.Iterator.html#method.skip_while)
    that took the iterator as a `&mut self` instead of taking ownership of it.
    Then I wouldn't have to have that `while`-loop and could instead just have
    written it as `b.skip_while(|c| c[0] < elem)`.
[^if-let]: I wish the `if let Some(...)` construction could have a second
    condition on the binding so I don't have to use `is_some_and` followed by
    `unwrap` inside the `if` or another `if` inside the `if let`. My dream would
    look something like `if let Some(other) = b.peek() && other[0] == elem {` so
    that I can just use the `other` binding inside the `if`, no extra `unwrap`
    or nested `if` needed. If anyone out there reading this knows of a better
    way, let me know.
