---
title: "Advent of Code 2024: Day 05"
date: 2024-12-05T19:34:56+01:00
author: Martin Kauppinen
series: ["Advent of Code 2024", "Advent of Code"]
---

[Code for solutions available on
GitHub](https://github.com/martinkauppinen/aoc-2024).

## Print Queue

Today's puzzle is going to be a lesson in the power of implementing traits! But
only in part 2. Part 1 I initially solved the more naïve way.

The lore involves a list of updates with page numbers and a set of _page
ordering rules_, which each report must adhere to. The input is made up of two
chunks and looks something like this:

```
47|53
97|13
97|61
97|47
75|29
61|13

75,47,61,53,29
97,61,53,29,13
75,29,13
```

In the first chunk -- the _page ordering rules_ -- the syntax `a|b` means that
page `a` must occur __before__ page `b` for an update to be considered valid.
Each update is made up of an odd number of pages, and the end goal of this part
is to sum up the middle elements of all valid updates.

So we need to save the rules in some data structure that we can check against in
order to determine whether each update line is valid. Each page number can have
more than one other page number it must appear before (e.g. `97` has 3 different
page numbers it must appear before in the example above). So each entry in the
data structure should probably be a `Vec<u32>`. The page ordering rules could be
implemented as a `HashMap<u32, u32>`, but in my experience the puzzles in Advent
of Code tend to be designed in such a way that using a hash map is slow. I noted
that all page numbers seem to be between 10 and 99, inclusive. And as such I
sacrificed some memory footprint for speed to avoid hashing:

```rust
type PageOrderingRules = [Vec<u32>; 100];
```

That's right, I'm not even bothering making a struct for this one. A simple type
alias to a slice of size 100 will do. Then the page number is simply an index
into the slice to get the page numbers it must appear before. Similarly, the
type describing an update is just an alias for `Vec<u32>`:

```rust
type Update = Vec<u32>;
```

So the input parsing function will get the following signature:

```rust
fn parse_input(&str) -> (PageOrderingRules, Vec<Update>)
```

The parsing itself isn't that interesting, so I'll omit its implementation.

Now we need a function to make sure an `Update` adheres to the
`PageOrderingRules`. It needs to scan the `Update`, keeping track of which
numbers it has seen, and return `false` if it encounters a page number that must
appear before a page number it has already seen. This can be accomplished by a
slice of `bool`s that the page number indexes into:

```rust
fn valid_update(98
    update: &Update,
    rules: &PageOrderingRules
) -> bool {

    let mut seen = [false; 100];
    for page in update {
        seen[*page as usize] = true;

        if rules[*page as usize]
            .iter()
            .any(|p| seen[*p as usize])
        {
            return false;
        }
    }
    true
}
```

Good! Now we can filter the `Vec<Update>`. Since all the updates are of odd
length, getting the middle element is the same thing as integer division of the
length of the `Update` by 2:

```rust
let result = updates
    .iter()
    .filter(|update| valid_update(update, &rules))
    .map(|update| update[update.len() / 2])
    .sum();
```

And that's essentially it for part 1!

### Part 2

Now, we need to process the invalid updates. And what we have to do is make them
valid and then do the same middle element sum on the fixed updates. An initial
thought to adapt the solution described above for part 1 might look like this:

1. Filter the invalid updates (easy, just invert the condition from part 1)
2. Find the positions of a pair of pages that violate the rules (simple enough)
3. Swap them (no problem)
4. Check if the update is valid. If not, repeat. (hmmm...)
5. Sum the middle page numbers (we already know how)

Step 4 is problematic. How many times will the swapping happen? Swapping a
pair of pages might violate a different rule and so the entire update will
have to be checked again. I'm not sure how to define the time complexity of
this.

So this simple swapping solution can probably be thrown out. It's not well
defined enough for me to have faith it will even work. But swapping positions of
elements in a list should ring a bell to any computer scientist. This sounds
like a sorting problem in disguise!

We're just in a strange world where -- from the example above -- 97 is _less
than_ 13, 61, and 47. The _ordering_ of page numbers is defined differently than
regular numbers. Hmmm... Ordering...

#### Enter the [`Ord`](https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/cmp/trait.Ord.html) trait!

If we define our own `struct` for page numbers, and implement the `Ord` trait,
we can call `.sort()` on a `Vec` of page numbers and it will _just work_. A page
number can be defined as a pair of a number, and the set of `PageOrderingRules`.
Since all page numbers will share the same rules, it makes sense to make that
member a reference. Here's how I defined it:

```rust
struct Page<'a>(u32, &'a PageOrderingRules);
```

If you don't want to deal with lifetimes, you can of course always just clone
the rules into each `Page` you construct. But that's gonna be a _lot_ of cloning
if you look at the inputs. For example, my input for this puzzle has around 200
lines of updates, each with around 15 page numbers. 15 * 200 = 3000 `Page`s that
need to be constructed. And with each page number possibly having a `Vec` of
other numbers it must appear before as a rule, it's potentially a lot of
cloning. Maybe not in absolute terms, but a lot of small clones isn't good
either.

Lifetimes rant aside, now we need to implement `Ord` for `Page<'a>`. When is a
`Page` less than another `Page`? Why, when the other `Page` appears in the
first's list of rules, of course! If the reverse is true, the `Page` is greater
than the other. In all other cases it doesn't matter, so we'll just say the
pages are equal:

```rust
impl<'a> Ord for Page<'a> {
    fn cmp(&self, other: &Self) -> std::cmp::Ordering {
        if self.1[self.0 as usize].contains(&other.0) {
            std::cmp::Ordering::Less
        } else if other.1[other.0 as usize].contains(&self.0) {
            std::cmp::Ordering::Greater
        } else {
            std::cmp::Ordering::Equal
        }
    }
}

// To impl `Ord`, you have to impl `PartialOrd`.
// Luckily you can just do that in terms of `Ord`.
impl<'a> PartialOrd for Page<'a> {
    fn partial_cmp(&self, other: &Self) -> Option<std::cmp::Ordering> {
        Some(self.cmp(other))
    }
}
```

Now we can just map the `Update`s (`Vec<u32>`s) into a series of `Page<'a>`s
and, beautifully, filter using
[`Vec::is_sorted`](https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/vec/struct.Vec.html#method.is_sorted).
Then just call
[`Vec::sort`](https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/vec/struct.Vec.html#method.sort) on
the resulting updates and sum up the middle elements just like before:

```rust
let result = updates
    .into_iter()
    .map(|update| update.into_iter().map(|p| Page(p, &rules)).collect_vec())
    .filter(|update| !update.is_sorted())
    .map(|mut update| {
        update.sort();
        update[update.len() / 2].0
    })
    .sum();
```

And I think that's pretty neat.

Once I figured out this sorting trick, I went back to part 1, deleted the
`validate_update` function and just solved it with the same sorting method.

I feel like this is a great demonstration of the power of implementing some of
the traits in the standard library. It can unlock some really neat
functionality and make solving problems a breeze.

[Full
code](https://github.com/martinkauppinen/aoc-2024/blob/main/src/bin/05.rs).
