---
title: "Advent of Code 2023: Day 06"
date: 2023-12-06T23:33:24+01:00
author: Martin Kauppinen
series: ["Advent of Code 2023"]
---

[Code for solutions available on GitHub.](https://github.com/martinkauppinen/aoc-2023/)

## Wait For It
This day was really easy. I actually initally solved it in about 15 minutes in
the morning. At work. In Excel.

The input looks as follows:
```
Time:      7  15   30
Distance:  9  40  200
```

This represents 3 races of toy boats, where the time row is the total units of
time the race lasts, and the distance row represents the record distance in the
race.

The way the toy boats move is that they have a button on top that for every unit
of time it is held down, they gain 1 unit of speed which is unleashed when the
button is released. Think remote control car being held in the air while being
accelerated then dropped and taking off immediately. There's a tradeoff here
between how long to hold the button to gain maximum speed and releasing the
button as soon as possible to have more time to travel a greater distance.

The challenge is to find all possible integer values for units of time to hold
down the button that result in beating the record distance.

Let's do this mathematically.

* The total time `T` of a race is the button hold time `t` plus the race time, `t_race`
* `D` is the record distance for the race
* `v` is the velocity of the boat, and is equal to `t`
* The distance function `d(t) = v * t_race = t * (T - t)`

We want to beat the previous record, meaning that we want `d(t) - D > 0`. So finding the roots of the following equation:
```
t * (T - t) - D = 0
-t^2 + Tt - D = 0
```
will give the exact values for `t` (button hold time) that will result in beating the
record. However, since the button can only be held for integer units of time, we need
to round the lower root of `t` to the next integer, and the upper root to the previous
integer. So `t2 - t1 + 1` should be the answer (where `t1` and `t2` are the
appropriately rounded roots). However, If the quadratic has integer roots, the
rounding doesn't do anything, and holding the button for exactly the same amount
of time will result in tying the record, not beating it. So we need a corretion
term subtracting 1 for each root that has a zero fractional part. The full
solution is thus
```
t2 - t1 + 1 - correction_term
```
I'm not even going to bother with documenting the Rust code. It's pretty uninteresting. [It's here if you need it.](https://github.com/martinkauppinen/aoc-2023/commit/c72fe7db50913c0a6f4a6f01dfbc95f3afce60b3)