---
title: "Advent of Code 2024: Day 11"
date: 2024-12-11T21:13:05+01:00
author: Martin Kauppinen
series: ["Advent of Code 2024", "Advent of Code"]
---

[Code for solutions available on
GitHub](https://github.com/martinkauppinen/aoc-2024).

## Plutonian Pebbles

The out of memory saga.

### Problem description

The input is just a space-separated list of numbers:

```
0 1 10 99 999
```

They all represent stones in a row with said number each written on them.
However, these stones are weird. Every time you blink, they change! But they
remain in a line. They change according to one of three _rules_:

1. `0`s turn into `1`s
2. If a stone's number has an _even_ number of digits, it gets replaced by _two_
   stones. Each gets one half of the digits, split down the middle. E.g. one
   stone with the number `1234` gets replaced by two stones with the numbers
   `12` and `34`.
3. All other stones' numbers get multiplied by 2024.

### Part 1
This is one of those problems that can easily run out of memory if you do it
naïvely. I will chronicle my first solution to part 1, which did not work for
part 2. Then my solution to part 2. In the repo, part 1 is solved in the exact
same manner as part 2. There's no trace of this older solution.

First, what is a stone? As always, I began by modelling the problem with some
data structure:

```rust
enum Stone {
    Number(u128),
    Split(Rc<RefCell<Stone>>, Rc<RefCell<Stone>>),
}
```

What the heck is that `Split` variant? Well, since Rust types have to have a
defined size, you can't define them in terms of themselves. So they need the
outer `Rc` for some indirection. Then I want to be able to mutate each stone in
a split. Hence the inner `RefCell`. Conceptually, this is actually just

```rust
enum Stone {
    Number(u128),
    Split(Stone, Stone),
}
```

If Rust allowed recursive types like this.

But why even this in the first place? Why not represent the line of stones with 
a simple `Vec`? Well, since there will be a lot of splitting, and the problem
specifically pointed out that stones remain in a line and in the same order, I
figured I would avoid the extra shuffling around of memory by creating a tree
structure. Then we have a `Vec` of trees with a well-defined ordering still.

Consider the example given in the problem description. Initially, this is
modelled as

```
0   -   1   -   10   -   99   -   999
```

But after one blink, `10` and `99` will split. Applying this and the other
rules, the `Vec<Stone>` conceptually looks like this:

```
1   -   2024   -   X   -   X   -   2021976
                  / \     / \
                 1   0   9   9
```

Note how the last element stayed in place. No moving things around in the `Vec`.
I figured I would need to traverse things in order somehow in part 2, so I
modelled it this way to save on memmoves and `Vec`-growing.

But anyway, back to the problem at hand. The task is to figure out how many
numbers will be in the list after 25 blinks. As you can imagine, this number
will be pretty big. I wrote some code to traverse the `Stone`s depending on
whether they were simple numbers or trees of numbers:

```rust
impl Stone {
    fn count(self) -> usize {
        match self {
            Stone::Number(_) => 1,
            Stone::Split(a, b) => {
                a.borrow().count() + b.borrow.count()
            }
        }
    }
}
```

Then, this can simply be mapped over the `Vec<Stone>` after applying the rules
25 times:

```rust
stones
    .into_iter()
    .map(Stone::count)
    .sum()
```

And it's complete.

### Part 2

Part 2 simply asks: "What about after 75 blinks?". This is where the naïve
approach of actually saving every single number runs out of memory. Or maybe it
doesn't, I don't know I simply stopped it when it took more than 10 seconds.
Either way it's a bad solution.

The description of part 2 reveals that there's no reason to model them as in a
line, or even the order of them. Also, all stones are fungible and get the rules
applied to them at the same time. Instead of iterating over every single number
in a loooooong list with deeeeeep trees, just store the count of each number
you've seen in a `HashMap` and update it every blink.

```rust
let mut number_count = HashMap::<u128, u128>::new();

// Count all initial stone values
stones.into_iter().for_each(|stone| {
    number_count
        .entry(stone)
        .and_modify(|count| *count += 1)
        .or_insert(1);
});

// Blink blink blink
for _ in 0..75 {
    // Have to make a copy of the HashMap,
    // since entries are iterated over in
    // an arbitrary order.
    let mut copy = number_count.clone();
    for (number, count) in number_count.iter() {
        let num_digits = number.checked_ilog10().unwrap_or(0) + 1;

        // Rule 1
        if *number == 0 {
            *copy.entry(1).or_insert(0) += *count;

        // Rule 2
        } else if num_digits % 2 == 0 {
            let modulus = 10u128.pow((num_digits + 1) / 2);
            let left = number / modulus;
            let right = number % modulus;

            *copy.entry(left).or_insert(0) += *count;
            *copy.entry(right).or_insert(0) += *count;

        // Rule 3
        } else {
            *copy.entry(*number * 2024).or_insert(0) += *count;
        }

        // Update applies to all instances of
        // the current stone number.
        copy.entry(*number).and_modify(|c| *c -= *count);
    }

    // Write the copy back to finalize the update.
    number_count = copy;
}

number_count.values().sum()
```

This terminates much faster (9.9ms) than whatever the previous solution would
have terminated in. And also fits in my RAM.

### Reflections on a conjecture

This whole thing reminded me of the [Collatz
conjecture](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Collatz_conjecture) with simple rules
for how to get from each number to the next. But obviously, this particular set
of rules can't make the numbers explode in size, otherwise it wouldn't have been
an Advent of Code problem. It must be provable that all numbers converge (or at
least stay small in a loop, I suppose).

Rules 1 and 2 don't really increase the number drastically. So no need to
analyze them. Rule 1 just increments, and rule 2 increases the total count of
numbers, but the numbers themselves are guaranteed to be smaller.

Rule 3 is more interesting though. It definitely makes numbers bigger. Can this
ever get out of hand?

Well, rule 3 only applies to numbers with an odd amount of digits. If we write
the odd-digit'ed number `X` in scientific notation, it looks like this:

```
X = c * 10^(2k)
```

A number with an odd amount of digits will have an even power of 10 in
scientific notation and vice-versa. We multiply this by 2024, an even number:

```
X * 2024 = (c *  10^(2k)) * (2.024 * 10^3)
         = 2.024c * 10^(2k + 3)
```

An odd power of 10 in the result, meaning we will get an even number of digits.
The next step will therefore _guaranteed_ split the resulting number into half
the amount of digits.

A number with an even amount of digits (odd power of 10, i.e. `10^(2n - 1)`)
will be split into two numbers with `n + 1` digits. Thus their powers of 10 will
be simply `n`, which in turn means all such numbers are strictly less than
`10^(n + 1)`.

Taking these facts, and substituting `n = k + 1` into the calculation for `X *
2024`:

```
X * 2024 = 2.024c * 10^(2n + 1)
→ X_a < 10^(n + 1) = 10^(k + 2)
```

Thus for an initial `k` greater than 2, i.e. `X > 10000`, this is _guaranteed_ to
make the odd-digit'ed numbers smaller after multiplying by 2024 and then
splitting once. Restricting numbers to converge to less than 10000 means they
fit in the `HashMap` nicely, which is why this solution is guaranteed to work.
And which is why this is a valid problem to pose for Advent of Code.

I wrote all this mathematical hand-wavy proof down on an envelope on my desk in
a moment of inspiration and figured I should share it here as well :)
