---
title: "Advent of Code 2024: Day 09"
date: 2024-12-09T20:17:01+01:00
author: Martin Kauppinen
series: ["Advent of Code 2024", "Advent of Code"]
---

[Code for solutions available on
GitHub](https://github.com/martinkauppinen/aoc-2024).

## Disk Fragmenter

Time to fragment some files! We're given a _disk map_, which is just a long
string of digits kind of like this:

```
2333133121414131402
```

The digits alternate between representing files and free space, in a unit of
_blocks_. So in the above example, the disk consists of a 2-block file, 3 blocks
of free space, a 3-block file, 3 more blocks of free space, a 1-block file, etc.
Thus a file is never larger than 9 blocks. Each file has its own unique ID,
incrementing from 0. Thus, if we represent the disk map above as a series of
blocks, giving each block a file ID if it's a file, or just the character `.` if
it's empty, we get the following layout:

```
00...111...2...333.44.5555.6666.777.888899
```

The task is to compress these files into a contiguous range of blocks at the
start of the disk, so that there is a contiguous free space to the end of the
disk from the end of the file blocks. This is done by moving file blocks _one
at a time_ from the end of the disk to the leftmost free block[^reverse-files].

[^reverse-files]: This would in real life have the effect of reversing the file
    blocks, but we don't care about that in this task.

We can start by defining what a `Block` can be on the file system[^option]:

```rust
enum Block {
    Empty,
    File { id: u64 },
}
```

[^option]: This could have simply been an `Option<u64>`, but I didn't at this
    point know what part 2 had in store, so I didn't want to have to potentially
    rewrite stuff in case it was going to be complicated.

Our _disk map_ can then be parsed into a `Vec<Block>`, and we can begin the
simple solution. This is a classic two-pointer technique kind of problem. We
simply keep track of two indices, one starting at the start of the `Vec` and one
starting at the end. The first one scans forwards until it finds an empty block,
the second scans backwards until it finds a file block. Then they swap places.
Once the two pointers meet, the job is done.

```rust
let mut head = 0;
let mut tail = blocks.len() - 1;

loop {

    while !matches!(blocks[head], Block::Empty) {
        head += 1;
    }
    while matches!(blocks[head], Block::Empty) {
        tail -= 1;
    }

    if tail <= head {
        break;
    }

    blocks.swap(head, tail);
}
```

Then, to get the final answer we're supposed to multiply each file block's ID by
its position on the disk and sum it all up. Pretty straighforward to implement:

```rust
blocks
    .into_iter()
    .filter_map(|block| match block {
        Block::Empty => None,
        Block::File { id } => Some(id),
    })
    .enumerate()
    .fold(0, |acc, (i, id)| acc + (i as u64 * id))
```

Man, I love `.fold()`s.

### Part 2

Turns out file system fragmentation is actually a pretty bad idea, and this
solution was terrible. Everything is running slower. So instead of trying to
compact the file system maximally, how about we keep the file blocks intact and
contiguous instead? This will lead to some wasted space inbetween files, but at
least the file can be read in one go.

The way we're supposed to do this is again by moving files from the end of the
disk to the start. But this time we have to fit them into a contiguous range of
free blocks that can fit the contiguous range of file blocks. Moving
right-to-left, we don't have to care too much about how space can be freed up by
moving a different file. If a file can't be moved, it simply won't be. This is a
single-pass algorithm. My implementation of this is pretty long and terrible, but
the gist of it is this:

1. Scan through the disk, find the starting index and size of each free space.
2. Scan through the disk, find the starting index and size of each file.
3. For all files in backwards order:
    1. For all chunks of contiguous free blocks in forward order:
        1. If the chunk appears _after_ the file, break this inner loop and move
           on to the next file.
        2. Otherwise, if the free chunk can fit the file, swap the file into
           that space, then
        3. If the file took up all space in the free chunk, remove the chunk
           from the list of free chunks. Otherwise, increment the chunk's
           starting index and decrement its size by the size of the file. Then,
        4. Break this inner loop, move on to the next file.

You can view the full code of this algorithm [on
GitHub](https://github.com/martinkauppinen/aoc-2024/blob/main/src/bin/09.rs).
