---
title: "Advent of Code 2024: Day 03"
date: 2024-12-03T22:14:50+01:00
author: Martin Kauppinen
series: ["Advent of Code 2024", "Advent of Code"]
---

[Code for solutions available on
GitHub](https://github.com/martinkauppinen/aoc-2024).

## Mull It Over

Today we start getting into parsing instructions for some sort of virtual
machine. The input looks something like this:

```
xmul(2,4)%&mul[3,7]!@^do_not_mul(5,5)+mul(32,64]then(mul(11,8)mul(8,5))
```

and the task is to parse everything that looks like a multiplication
instruction, execute the multiplication, and sum up all results. That is, parse
and execute anything on the form `mul(x,y)`, where `x` and `y` are 1-3 digit
numbers. Anything not adhering to this format is not a valid instruction and
should be ignored. Even if you just put whitespaces in.

This limited grammar makes it pretty easy to write a parser with the excellent
[`nom` crate](https://crates.io/crates/nom/). My `nom`-parser for multiplication
instructions looks like this:

```rust
let mul_parser = map(
        preceded(
            tag("mul"),
            delimited(
                char('('),
                separated_pair(
                    nom::character::complete::u32,
                    char(','),
                    nom::character::complete::u32,
                ),
                char(')'),
            ),
        ),
        |(a, b)| Instruction::Mul(a, b),
    );
```

Just dumping it like that is pretty unreadable, but reading it from the inside
out, it's pretty simple. A multiplication instruction consists of a
`separated_pair` of `u32`s with commas between. These pairs are `delimited` by
parentheses. All of that is `preceded` by `"mul"`. Finally the result is mapped
into an `Instruction` enum, which is defined like this:

```rust
enum Instruction {
    Mul(u32, u32),
    <SPOILER>,
    <SPOILER>,
}
```

Why an enum? And why spoilers? Well, any time Advent of Code asks you to parse
something that seems like a computer instruction, they tend to in part 2 want
you to parse more instructions and build up a little virtual machine. Thus we
put it all in an enum from the start.

And how to build up the scanning parser that throws away characters until the
`mul_parser` can successfully parse an instruction? That's where the combinators
from `nom` come into play. We want to `many` times match `anychar`, until
`mul_parser` succeeds. And we want to do that `many` times.

```rust
let parser = many0(
    map(many_till(anychar, mul_parser), |(_, x)| x)
);
```

The `map` here just throws away the collected input characters that didn't match
the `mul_parser`.

Now we can just iterate over the result from parsing the input, execute the
multiplications, and sum up the answer. The shape of it looks something like
this:

```rust
let multiplications: Vec<Instruction> = parser(input).unwrap().1.into();

let result = multiplications
    .into_iter()
    // Throw away anything that isn't a Mul instruction
    // I haven't shown anything like that yet, but it's
    // relevant in part 2.
    .filter_map(|x| match x {
        Instruction::Mul(a, b) => Some((a, b)),
        _ => None,
    })
    .map(|(a, b)| a * b)
    .sum();
```

### Part 2

And now it's time for more instructions. The `do()` and `don't()` instructions
either enable or disable multiplication in our little virtual machine.
Multiplication starts enabled. So any `mul(x,y)` instructions between a
`don't()` and a `do()` should be skipped.

The `Instruction` enum now gets updated to

```rust
enum Instruction {
    Mul(u32, u32),
    Do,
    Dont,
}
```

And we should build a little virtual machine struct that has a list of
instructions and a flag to represent whether multiplication is enabled:

```rust
struct Machine {
    instructions: VecDeque<Instruction>,
    mul_enabled: bool,
}
```

Writing the specific parsers for `do()` and `don't()` is trivial and left as an
exercise to the reader[^reader-exercise]. We can then take our three parsers
and combine them using the `alt` combinator:

```rust
let instruction_parser = alt((
    do_parser,
    mul_parser,
    dont_parser
));
```

[^reader-exercise]: Or you can see how I implemented them
    [here](https://github.com/martinkauppinen/aoc-2024/blob/main/src/bin/03.rs#L64-L65)

which will try them all in sequence until one matches or none matches. Then we
simply put the parsed instructions into a `VecDeque`, since we have to execute
from the start of it and I chose to do that by `.pop_front()`. It can also be
done with simple iterators, but hey sometimes I like to over-engineer things.

By simply toggling the `mul_enabled` flag appropriately every time we hit a
`do()` or `don't()` instruction and skipping the `mul(x,y)` instructions if the
flag is set, it's pretty simple to implement the machine. Since it's a little
bit over-engineered for no reason, I won't reproduce the entire thing in this
post. You can see the whole thing
[here](https://github.com/martinkauppinen/aoc-2024/blob/main/src/bin/03.rs) if
you want to. Implementation is pretty straightforward. :)
