---
title: "Advent of Code 2024: Day 02"
date: 2024-12-02T20:26:33+01:00
author: Martin Kauppinen
series: ["Advent of Code 2024", "Advent of Code"]
---

[Code for solutions available on
GitHub](https://github.com/martinkauppinen/aoc-2024).

## Red-Nosed Reports

The puzzle for today is pretty simple. The input is a list of sequences of
numbers, like this:

```
7 6 4 2 1
1 2 7 8 9
9 7 6 2 1
1 3 2 4 5
8 6 4 4 1
1 3 6 7 9
```

The task for part 1 is to determine how many of these lines are _safe_. Being
_safe_ is defined as:

* The sequence is monotonically increasing or decreasing.
* The difference between each pair of numbers is at least 1 and at most 3.

If the input is parsed into a `Vec<Vec<u64>>`, it's pretty simple to figure out
if a sequence is _safe_. Thanks to the wonderful
[`.windows`](https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/primitive.slice.html#method.windows)
method on slices, which iterates over contiguous sub-slices in an overlapping
manner:

```
[1, 2, 3, 4].windows(2)
    -> [1, 2], [2, 3], [3, 4]
```
So iterating over the outer `Vec`, filtering the inner `Vec`s (taking
advantage of the fact that `&Vec<T>` is essentially `&[T]`, a slice) that are
safe, and counting how many we have left, we get our answer. The filtering
function I decided to write like this:

```rust
fn is_safe(levels: &[u64]) -> bool {
    let safe_differences = levels
        .windows(2)
        .all(|w| (1..=3).contains(&w[0].abs_diff(w[1])));
    let increasing = levels.windows(2).all(|w| w[0] < w[1]);
    let decreasing = levels.windows(2).all(|w| w[0] > w[1]);

    safe_differences && (increasing || decreasing)
}
```

Which can then be used to get the answer like this:

```rust
sequences.into_iter().filter(|s| is_safe(s)).count()
```

Very simple.

### Part 2

For part 2, there's a twist, as always. This time a sequence can be _safe_ if it
fulfills the above criteria ___or___ if it can be made to fulfill the criteria by
removing one single element. One example given is that the sequence
```
1 3 2 4 5
```
can be made _safe_ by removing the 3.

There are simple and more complex ways you might go about this. I chose the
simple way of just trying to remove one element at a time if the original
sequence was not _safe_. This ends up being O(n^2) in time, but the inputs are
so small and I had _A Day_ at work today so I didn't feel like engineering
something more clever. As such I won't reproduce the code here since it's just
more of the same. Instead I want to move on to something I learned while coding
it up!

### Range slicing quirk

In Rust, you can slice a... well...
[_slice_](https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/primitive.slice.html) by a range. That
is, get a sub-slice of `a` by indexing it like `a[i..j]` where `i` is the
starting index (inclusive) and `j` the ending index (exclusive). The end index
can be at most `a.len()`, otherwise the slicing panics. If both indices are
equal, you get an empty slice back. But a small detail, mentioned in the docs,
is that `a.len()` is a valid starting index for slicing with a range like this.

This is because the implementation of this only checks that the ending index is
not less than the starting index, and that the ending index is less than or equal
to the length of the slice. Less than _or equal_, since it is an exclusive
index. The consequence of this is that range slicing is not quite the same as
indexing, even though they use the same square bracket syntax[^obviously].

[^obviously]: I mean, obviously they're _not_ the same, since one gives you an
    element of the slice and the other gives you a sub-slice. But I expected
    that the range of input values would be the same for both of them (an
    ending index of `a.len()` is actually `a.len() - 1`, because of the whole
    _exclusive index_ business. So the domain of inputs is 0 to `a.len() - 1`.
    Or at least that's what I thought before discovering this. The domain kind
    of _includes_ `a.len()` for range slicing.

Here's a simple code summary of the difference between the two:

```rust
let arr = [1, 2, 3];
println!("{:?}", &arr[arr.len()..]); // OK. Prints "[]".
println!("{:?}", arr[arr.len()]); // Panic! Out of bounds!
```

So I learned something new today. :)
